TITLE Against "enhanced" basic web components
NAV Against "enhanced" basic web components
TEMPLATE DEFAULT
DESC I think "enhanced" versions of basic web components are a mistake. They add complexity, bugs, download size, and are unnecessary.

So browsers have `<button>`, `<input>`, `<select>` and all the other essential UI elements as built-in, styleable components. Admittedly they don't look very nice. But one thing I really disagree with about the direction the web ecosystem seems to be going is the fad of "enhanced" versions of these, like most of [the MWC components](https://github.com/material-components/material-components-web-components/). There's an `<mwc-button>`, an `<mwc-textfield>` (equivalent of `<input>`, because why not rename a couple of them too for extra confusion), an `<mwc-textarea>`, `<mwc-formfield>` which basically fills the purpose of `<label>` but is less flexible (it can't contain HTML), and a whole bunch more.

Before MWC, at my job we used the Polymer components: `paper-*`, `iron-*`, and `app-*` stuff. They were nice: they looked nice, they were a nice fat sack of dependencies, and the users liked 'em. But they're deprecated and we're trying to switch to the new MWC stuff. The new MWC stuff looks nice, is a nice fat sack of dependencies, has different interfaces and the users like them. But they've also introduced some issues.

Like <a href="https://github.com/material-components/material-components-web-components/issues/455#issuecomment-574330528">the ugly hack we've had to come up with to make `<mwc-textarea>` autoexpand</a>. We've applied that hack in several places, and one day it stopped working after we updated minor versions and its internal HTML structure had changed, so I spent about an hour to figure out how the hack needed to be amended. This does also require [a Javascript fix](https://github.com/yujiri8/yujiri.xyz/tree/master/js/src/util.js) for the native element, but it's much simpler, doesn't require peeking inside shadow DOM, and won't break when your library updates.

I just think the whole idea of enhanced basic web components is wrong-headed. Maybe it does make sense in marketing terms to use them on your website if users like the look. But [for the love of simplicity](https://yujiri.xyz/software/features), I think we'd all be better off if we just stuck to the built-in components, and one of two things would happen: either the browser vendors would implement nicer default styling, or users would learn to not mind them. Kind of a prisoner's dilemma, maybe.
